120
CHAPTER SIX
PTOLEMY
1. FROM THE GREEK INTO ARABIC AND
FROM ARABIC INTO LATIN
The Optics of Ptolemy was first published in Latin by Gilberto
Govi in 1885,¹ but it remained unknown to historians of art
and perspective until 1957, when Decio Gioseffi mentioned it
for the first time.² However, this scholar limited his analysis to
just a few lines of paragraph 4 of book III, a paragraph that will
also be analyzed in this chapter. From that point on, Ptolemy's
Optics has not, as far as I know, been taken into consideration
by historians of art and perspective.
The principal reason that scholars have abstained from
studying Ptolemy's Optics is especially because of the diffi-
culty of the Latin language in which the work has come down
to us. The admiral Eugenius of Sicily, who lived in the second
half of the twelfth century at the court of the Norman kings in
Palermo, translated Ptolemy's Optics from Arabic into Latin; the
Arabic version was, in its turn, a translation from the Greek, the
language in which Ptolemy, living in the first half of the second
century A.D., had written the work. Govi was the first to rightly
underscore that the Latin is quite often obscure because it was a
literal translation from Arabic and that the geometric concepts
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139198905.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PTOLEMY
are often improper as a result of the translator's ignorance of
the correct expressions needed to be able to translate them from
Arabic into Latin. There is no known documentation regarding
the existence of the Arabic text from which the Latin is derived,
nor is there any information regarding the original Greek text
from which the Arabic is derived.
These same difficulties of interpretation were expressed by
Albert Lejeune,³ who spoke of a translation of a translation,
such that it could discourage any reader in good faith, and by
A. Mark Smith, who spoke of a text difficult to penetrate, being
so tortuous and confused that it is often incomprehensible.5
Again, it is worth noting that both Lejeune and Smith, in
providing their first translations in French and in English, took
upon themselves an onerous task, not unlike that of paleogra-
phers, when these scholars attempt to decipher deep layers of
a palimpsest. For this reason, Lejeune and Smith were forced
to adhere scrupulously to an exegetic reconstruction of a very
difficult text.
My task, however, has been first of all to take a look at the
entire reconstructed work of the Ptolemaic text by Lejeune
and Smith, then successively to go beyond it in an attempt to
specifically illustrate some passages of the Optics with draw-
ings, and finally to compare them in modern terms with the
geometric theories of representation."
Let us begin with Sermo Tertius De Opticis Tholomei, that is to
say "The Third Speech on the Optics of Ptolemy" - also known
as "The Third Book (or Sermon)" on the Optics, according to
how we prefer to translate the Latin word Sermo naturally
limiting our attention to an analysis of flat mirrors only.
2. THE THREE PRINCIPLES RELATIVE
TO THE SCIENCE OF MIRRORS
We begin with paragraph 3:
Since, therefore, in every field in which one turns to science
there is the necessity of a number of general principles, that is
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139198905.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
@
121

122
PERSPECTIVe in VisuaL CULTURE OF CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY
to say, how the objects place themselves, in an unfailing and
indisputable manner, in front of us, effectively as well as cor-
rectly, from the demonstrations of which one can make deduc-
tions, we must say that the principles that one requires for
the science of mirrors are specifically three, and that these are
primary elements of knowledge that are possible to learn by
oneself. The first [principle] is that by which one recognizes
that the objects, which can be seen in mirrors, appear in con-
formity with the direction of the visual ray, which falls upon
the objects by means of its own reflection. This [reflection]
is verified in conformity with the position of the pupil with
respect to the mirror. The second [principle], without a doubt,
is that by which one recognizes that the single [points] that
one sees in the mirrors appear on the perpendicular line that
falls from the object that is seen onto the surface of the mir-
ror and penetrates it. The third [principle], instead, is that by
which one recognizes that the position of the bent ray, which
is found between the pupil and the mirror and between the
mirror and the thing that is to be seen, is such that each of
these two [segments] arrives at the point in respect to which
the break occurs, while they contain, parting from the mirror,
angles equal with the perpendicular line that exits from the
very same point.⁹
Here the general principles relative to the science of flat
mirrors are described, and it is specified that they are pri-
mary notions that one can verify by oneself. The first thing
that stands out as evident is that the mirrors constitute a
field in which one may turn to science. This is an authentic
invitation to experimental verification as to how objects are
distributed in front of us in an unfailing and indisputable
manner.
In order to better illustrate and render visible what we have
to say (Fig. 83), we begin by assigning:
a. A vertical flat mirror
b. The position O of our pupil, or of our eye, which orthogo-
nally fixes the mirror at point O' (the principal point)
c. The real object
d. The reflected image of the real object
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139198905.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press